her own spiritual baseness, which she had not suspected, but which had
shown itself during her father�s illness. She wished to pray but did not
dare to, dared not in her present state of mind address herself to God.
She lay for a long time in that position.

The sun had reached the other side of the house, and its slanting rays
shone into the open window, lighting up the room and part of the morocco
cushion at which Princess Mary was looking. The flow of her thoughts
suddenly stopped. Unconsciously she sat up, smoothed her hair, got up,
and went to the window, involuntarily inhaling the freshness of the
clear but windy evening.

�Yes, you can well enjoy the evening now! He is gone and no one will
hinder you,� she said to herself, and sinking into a chair she let her
head fall on the window sill.

Someone spoke her name in a soft and tender voice from the garden and
kissed her head. She looked up. It was Mademoiselle Bourienne in a black
dress and weepers. She softly approached Princess Mary, sighed, kissed
her, and immediately began to cry. The princess looked up at her. All
their former disharmony and her own jealousy recurred to her mind.
But she remembered too how he had changed of late toward Mademoiselle
Bourienne and could not bear to see her, thereby showing how unjust were
the reproaches Princess Mary had mentally addressed to her. �Besides,
is it for me, for me who desired his death, to condemn anyone?� she
thought.

Princess Mary vividly pictured to herself the position of Mademoiselle
Bourienne, whom she had of late kept at a distance, but who yet was
dependent on her and living in her house. She felt sorry for her
and held out her hand with a glance of gentle inquiry. Mademoiselle
Bourienne at once began crying again and kissed that hand, speaking of
the princess� sorrow and making herself a partner in it. She said her
only consolation was the fact that the princess allowed her to share her
sorrow, that all the old misunderstandings should sink into nothing but
this great grief; that she felt herself blameless in regard to everyone,
and that he, from above, saw her affection and gratitude. The princess
heard her, not heeding her words but occasionally looking up at her and
listening to the sound of her voice.

�Your position is doubly terrible, dear princess,� said Mademoiselle
Bourienne after a pause. �I understand that you could not, and cannot,
think of yourself, but with my love for you I must do so.... Has
Alp�tych been to you? Has he spoken to you of going away?� she asked.

Princess Mary did not answer. She did not understand who was to go or
where to. �Is it possible to plan or think of anything now? Is it not
all the same?� she thought, and did not reply.

�You know, ch�re Marie,� said Mademoiselle Bourienne, �that we are in
danger�are surrounded by the French. It would be dangerous to move now.
If we go we are almost sure to be taken prisoners, and God knows...�

Princess Mary looked at her companion without understanding what she was
talking about.

�Oh, if anyone knew how little anything matters to me now,� she said.
�Of course I would on no account wish to go away from him.... Alp�tych
did say something about going.... Speak to him; I can do nothing,
nothing, and don�t want to....�